# Tunings
TP. 2024-06-23

# Conclusions

# Synopsis

1. Equal temperement
2. Simple harmonics
3. Pythagorean Tuning
4. Circle of fifth
5. Just intonation

# Equal temperement

The equal temerement tuning is so natural, that it is difficult to understand, that it is not the only one.

Each of the 12 semi-tones in the octave has a frequency ratio of $2^(1/12) = 1.05946 = 1.06$

## TODO "score plot" with lines every 200 cents

Compare to normal score.

## TODO when was equal temperement invented

Why would anybody ever use other tunings?

# Pythagorean tuning

Many musical instruments are based on strings or "winds".
They have (some) connection between their geometry and the tones produced.

It has been observed that eg strings with lengths of simple integer proportions produce "hrmonic" sounds. 
For elastic strings (and wind instruments?) this corresponds to the invese proportions between frequencies.

In particular half length = Double frequency is percieved as the same tone.
Also 3:2 is considered harmonic: The perfect fifth.

## TODO: Play octave, fifth

This leads to "the circle of fifths". 

This "almost works": $(3/2)^12 = 129.75 ~  2^7 = 128$.
The difference is called the "pythagorean comma".

"Poor pythagoras".

## TODO plot circle of fiths

# Simple harmonics

The octave being percived as the same to leads to the concept of "pich classes".
"Pich classes" are equivalence classes of frequencies of the form $2^n f$, $n \in Z$.

An elastic string typically has not only the base frequency $f$, but also the "over tones" with frequencies $2f, 3f, 4f, ...$
This gives the tone it's "timbre".

Let's look at the pich classes of the harmonics.

## TODO Harmonics, pythagorean, equal temper Table, log-freq plot

Root this at C1 to see how the harmonics are close to C, E, G.

# Just intonation

Chords of simple intervals.

Minimize: "sum of integers + \labda sum of cent differences to equal temper notes".

## Triad

- 3:2, 5:4 = 6:5:4, Play and equal temper approximation

What is 3:2:1? Ocate + fifth. Play equal temper approximation.

- 4:3:2?
- 5:4:3?
- 6:5:4: major triad
- 6:5:4:3?

## TODO: Find closest equal temper to given frequency rations

- play just and approximate

## TODO find closest harmonics to given pich class (for given max harmonics).

cents of difference.

Play intervals.

## TODO find closest harmonics minimizing sum of integers and \lambda sum of cent differences.
